                                                  Hard CNF Instances for Ideal Proof Systems
                                             Tuomas Hakoniemi∗                   Nutan Limaye†                          Iddo Tzameret‡
                                            University of Helsinki         IT University of Copenhagen              Imperial College London

                                                                                       May 7, 2026
arXiv:2605.04544v1 [cs.CC] 6 May 2026




                                                                                         Abstract
                                                  Since the introduction of the Ideal Proof System (IPS) by Grochow and Pitassi (J. ACM
                                              2018), a substantial body of work has established size lower bounds for IPS and its fragments. In
                                              particular, Forbes, Shpilka, Tzameret, and Wigderson (Theory Comput. 2021) developed the main
                                              lower-bound frameworks for restricted IPS fragments, namely functional lower bounds and the
                                              hard multiples method, while Alekseev, Grigoriev, Hirsch, and Tzameret (SIAM J. Comput. 2024)
                                              gave a general template for conditional lower bounds for full IPS.
                                                 Yet all these lower bounds apply only to purely algebraic formulas over a field, that is,
                                              non-Boolean formulas not directly expressible in propositional logic. Proving lower bounds for
                                              CNF formulas has therefore remained a central open problem in this line of work.
                                                 The current work resolves this question for IPS over read-once oblivious algebraic branching
                                              programs (roABPs) by proving lower bounds for refutations of CNF formulas in this system. Our
                                              approach is a rank-based feasible interpolation argument, following the method of Pudlák and
                                              Sgall (Proof Complexity and Feasible Arithmetic 1996) for monotone span programs, in which
                                              decomposing a given roABP refutation along a variable partition yields a low-dimensional space
                                              of polynomials from which we construct a span-program interpolant. We extend their result
                                              from Nullstellensatz refutations measured by degree to Nullstellensatz refutations measured by
                                              roABP size (i.e., roABP-IPSLIN ).


                                        1    Introduction
                                        This work investigates lower bounds against algebraic proof systems in the framework of the Ideal
                                        Proof System (IPS). Proof complexity studies the size of proofs certifying membership in languages
                                        such as UNSAT, the set of unsatisfiable Boolean formulas. In this setting, a proof is an efficiently
                                        verifiable witness, and for UNSAT such a proof is usually called a refutation. A central goal of
                                        the area is to prove lower bounds for increasingly strong proof systems, with the ultimate aim of
                                        showing that no proof system has polynomial-size refutations for all unsatisfiable formulas. This
                                        line of work is often called Cook’s programme, following Cook’s proposal that proof complexity lower
                                           ∗
                                             Email: tuomas.hakoniemi@helsinki.fi This work has been supported by Helsinki Institute for Information
                                        Technology (HIIT).
                                           †
                                             Email: nuli@itu.dk This project is supported by funding from Independent Research Fund Denmark (grant
                                        agreement No. 10.46540/3103-00116B) and by the Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen (BARC), which is funded
                                        by VILLUM Foundation Grant 54451.
                                           ‡
                                             Email: iddo.tzameret@gmail.com This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC)
                                        under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 101002742,
                                        EPRICOT project). It was also supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
                                        under grant EP/Z534158/1, Integrated Approach to Computational Complexity: Structure, Self-Reference and Lower
                                        Bounds


                                                                                              1
bounds may shed light on basic complexity-theoretic problems such as P versus NP. In particular,
proving that no proof system efficiently refutes all unsatisfiable formulas would separate NP from
coNP, and hence also P from NP.
     Despite major progress, the main lower bound questions in proof complexity, especially those
relating to strong enough proof systems such as textbook propositional logic remain open. Even
proving lower bounds against propositional proofs operating with constant-depth formulas with
counting modulo p gates (i.e. AC0 [p]-Frege) is open. In order to gain better understanding of the
latter proof system, algebraic proof systems have been extensively studied beginning in the 1990s
(cf. [BIK+ 96]). Moreover, a recent important direction has been to study algebraic proof complexity,
with the hope to bring methods from algebraic complexity theory proper into proof complexity
(see [PT16] for a survey). Here one ideally aims to shed light on proof systems that goes beyond
AC0 [p]-Frege, going up to Frege (i.e. textbook propositional proofs).
     The Ideal Proof System, introduced by Grochow and Pitassi [GP18], gives a particularly clean
formulation of the connection between algebraic circuits and propositional proofs. IPS can be viewed
as a circuit-size version of Nullstellensatz refutations [BIK+ 96], and hence as a proof system that
directly incorporates algebraic circuit complexity into the proof complexity setting. In this way it
gives a transparent reduction from circuit lower bounds to proof lower bounds as shown in [GP18]:
an IPS lower bound for a CNF formula implies that the permanent polynomial does not have
polynomial-size algebraic circuits, namely, VP ≠ VNP. Conversely, Santhanam and Tzameret [ST25]
established a partial converse, giving further evidence that IPS forms a natural bridge between
algebraic complexity and proof complexity. Namely, assuming VP ̸= VNP, they constructed a
family of CNF formulas admitting no polynomial-size IPS refutations. A qualification is that the
unsatisfiability of this family remains open, although there is evidence supporting it. The standard
formulation of IPS used in this line of work is equivalent to circuit-size Nullstellensatz, and for
restricted circuit classes one considers the corresponding fragments such as C-IPSLIN (see below for
more details).
     Forbes, Shpilka, Tzameret and Wigderson [FSTW21] introduced two approaches for turning
algebraic circuit lower bounds into lower bounds for IPS: the functional lower bound method
and the lower bounds for multiples method. Other approaches include the meta-complexity ap-
proach of [ST25], which obtains a (conditional) IPS size lower bounds on a self-referential state-
ment (cf. [LST26]) and the noncommutative approach of Li, Tzameret and Wang [LTW18] (building
on [Tza11]).
     At the same time, the intended connection back to propositional logic has not yet been fully
realised. All known unconditional lower bounds for IPS and its fragments apply to algebraic
instances that are not direct encodings of propositional formulas, and in particular not of CNF
formulas. Consequently, even a lower bound for IPS on such an algebraic instance does not by itself
give a hard instance for propositional proof systems, such as fragments of Extended Frege: the
hard instance is not a propositional formula, and hence is not an object in the usual language of
propositional logic.
     In fact, even moving beyond the single-axiom framework has remained unclear. The lower
bounds obtained via the functional lower-bound method
                                                   P      are all based on a single non-Boolean axiom,
typically a variant of the subset-sum equation i xi = β, where β is chosen so that the equation
has no 0-1 solutions, for example β = −1. Thus, these results leave open the problem of proving
IPS lower bounds for genuinely propositional instances. Andrews and Forbes [AF22] obtained lower
bounds against constant-depth IPS, using the hard multiples method, for an algebraic instance
with multiple axioms. However, their result is in the “placeholder” model of IPS refutations: the
hard instance itself has no polynomial-size constant-depth algebraic representation, and is not a
translation of a propositional formula.

                                                  2
    The current work resolves this open problem for a natural fragment of IPS, studied in [FSTW21,
HLT24, CGMS25, EGLT26], by giving the first hard CNF instances in this fragment. We work with
IPS refutations in which the certificate polynomials are computed by read-once oblivious algebraic
branching programs (roABPs). More precisely, we prove lower bounds for roABP-IPSLIN (defined
below).
    The argument goes back to classical results in propositional proof complexity about feasible
interpolation, using an algebraic formulation by Pudlák-Sgall [PS96]. To explain our result and setup
we need to start by giving more details about algebraic proof systems and the feasible interpolation
method in proof complexity.

Algebraic proof systems. Algebraic proof systems certify that a given set of multivariate
polynomials over a field has no common Boolean solutions. Some of the basic proof systems in this
line are the Polynomial Calculus (PC) [CEI96] and its ‘static’ variant, Nullstellensatz [BIK+ 96]. In
PC, proofs proceed by algebraic manipulation, adding and multiplying polynomials, until deriving
the contradiction 1 = 0. Contrastingly, in Nullstellensatz, a proof of the unsatisfiability of a set
of axioms, written as polynomial equations {fi (x) = 0} over a field, is a single formal polynomial
identity expressing 1 as a combination of the axioms, that is:
      X
          gi (x) · fi (x) = 1 ,                                                                 (0.1)
       i

for some polynomials {gi (x)}. These systems measure proof size by sparsity, defined as the total
number of monomials involved, which makes them comparatively weak. An alternative way to
measure proof size is by algebraic circuit size. This was suggested initially by Pitassi [Pit97, Pit98],
and further investigated in the work of Grigoriev and Hirsch [GH03] and subsequently Raz and
Tzameret [RT08b, RT08a], eventually leading to the Ideal Proof System [GP18] described in what
follows.

Ideal Proof System. The Ideal Proof System (IPS for short; Theorem 3), introduced by Grochow
and Pitassi [GP18], loosely speaking, is the Nullstellensatz proof system where the polynomials
gi (x̄) in Equation (0.1) are represented by algebraic circuits. Forbes, Shpilka, Tzameret and
Wigderson [FSTW21] showed that these two representations are formally equivalent. In other words,
an IPS refutation of the set of axioms {fi (x̄) = 0}i can be defined similarly to Equation (0.1):
        X                      X
                                 hj (x̄) · x2j − xj = 1,
                                                   
           gi (x̄) · fi (x̄) +                                                                  (0.2)
       i                  j

for some polynomials {gi (x̄)}i , where we think of the polynomials gi , hj written as algebraic circuits
(instead of e.g., counting the number of monomials they contain); and where x2j − xj are the set of
                                                            2
Boolean axioms, forcing every solution to the equationsP {xj − xj = 0 :Pj ∈ [n]} to 0-1 values. Thus,
the size of the IPS refutation in Equation (0.2) is i size (gi (x̄)) + j size (hj (x̄)), where size(g)
stands for the minimal size of an algebraic circuit computing the polynomial g.
    Note that IPS is not necessarily a Cook-Reckhow propositional proof system, in the sense that
there is no known deterministic polynomial-time algorithm to check whether a refutation is a correct
refutation. There reason is that to verify Equation (0.2) we need to preform polynomial identity
testing (PIT for short), which is a problem in coRP ⊆ BPP, not known to be in P.
    It is natural to consider IPS refutations where the polynomials gi (x) and hj (x) in Equation (0.2)
are written as algebraic circuits from a prescribed circuit class C, for example constant-depth
algebraic circuits. However, when considering C weaker than general algebraic circuits, one has to

                                                   3
be a bit careful with the definition of IPS. For technical reasons the formalization in Equation (0.2)
does not capture the precise definition of IPS restricted to the relevant circuit class, rather the
fragment which is denoted by C-IPSLIN (“LIN” here stands for the linearity of the axioms fi and
the Boolean axioms; that is, they appear as polynomials fid with power d = 1). In this work, we
focus on C-IPSLIN . Namely, refutations in the system C-IPSLIN are defined as in Equation (0.2)
where the polynomials gi (x), hj (x) are written as circuits in the circuit class C. In particular we
shall consider C to be the class of roABPs described in what follows.

Read-once oblivious algebraic branching programs. A read-once oblivious algebraic branch-
ing program (denoted, roABP) is a layered directed graph with two special vertices, the source
in the first layer and the sink in the last layer, and n − 1 layers in between, and where edges are
directed from source to sink. All nodes in layer i are connected with edges only to nodes in layer
i + 1. The edges between layer i and layer i + 1 are labeled with univariate polynomials in the
variable xi (i.e., in each layer all polynomials have the same (single) variable). Each source-to-node
path computes the polynomial that is the product of all the univariate polynomials on the path,
and the polynomial computed at each node is the sum of all paths incoming into the node. The
program itself computes the polynomial computed at the sink node. The width of an roABP is the
maximum number of nodes in any layer.
    Note that the order in which variables are read in a roABP is fixed. In the above description we
made the order to be from x1 to xn , namely, by increasing index order, but equivalently we can fix
any other linear (i.e., total) order.
    The proof system roABP-IPSLIN defines refutations as in Equation (0.2) in which gi (x) and
hj (x) are written as roABPs. This is an interesting system, because unlike IPS, roABP-IPSLIN
is known to be a Cook-Reckhow proof system: deterministic polynomial-time PIT algorithms for
roABPs are known (cf. Raz and Shpilka [RS05]). Moreover, roABP-IPSLIN is a test case for lower
bounds against IPS fragments, because of the relatively simple nature of roABPs, and the fact that
lower bounds against this circuit class are well understood.

Feasible interpolation. Let φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z) be an unsatisfiable propositional formula in
pairwise disjoint sequences of variables x, y and z. It follows that for every given total assignment
to z, either φ0 (x, z) or φ1 (y, z) is unsatisfiable (or both are); this is because, a single z-assignment
for which both φ0 (x, z) and φ1 (y, z) are satisfiable, could be merged into a satisfying assignment to
φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z).
     The basic interpolation property for propositional logic, analogous to Craig interpolation in
first-order logic, guarantees the existence of a function I defined on the z-variables such that:
               (
                 0, if φ0 (x, α) is satisfiable;
       I(α) =
                 1, if φ1 (y, α) is satisfiable.

    Such a function I is called an interpolant for the conjunction φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z). The function is
well-defined, i.e. single-valued, by the assumption that the conjunction is unsatisfiable as explained
above. In a similar manner, we can consider feasible interpolation for sets of polynomial equations
instead of propositional formula(s) (see bottom of Section 2.2).
    In the framework of feasible interpolation we are interested in the computational complexity of
the interpolants in terms of the sizes of the refutations of the propositional formulas. As such the
framework is a method to translate computational lower bounds to proof size lower bounds. See
Section 1.2 for more on the history of feasible interpolation.


                                                    4
Span programs. A span program [KW93] consists of a labeled matrix (M, σ) together with a
target vector t, where σ is a labeling of the rows, i.e., a mapping from the rows of M to the literals
in the variables z. We also allow labeling a row with the constant 1. A span program is monotone,
whenever there is no row labeled with a negative literal. The size of the span program is the number
of rows (irrespective of the number of columns).
    Equivalently, one may define span programs without choosing coordinates. In this formulation,
a span program consists of a finite set U of pairs (ℓ, v), where ℓ is a z-literal or the constant 1, and
v is a vector in some vector space V , together with a target vector t ∈ V . This is equivalent to
the matrix formulation: a matrix representation is obtained by choosing a basis of V and writing
the vectors v as coordinate rows, while conversely the rows of a labeled matrix are simply labeled
vectors in the ambient coordinate space. We use this coordinate-free formulation below because our
vectors will naturally be polynomials, and no particular choice of monomial basis will be relevant.
    A span program as above computes a Boolean function as follows: on a 0-1 assignment a to
the variables z, let U (a) be the set of vectors v so that there is some literal ℓ with (ℓ, v) ∈ U and
ℓ(a) = 1. In other words, U (a) consists of all vectors picked by the assignment z, namely those
vectors whose z-label gets 1 under a. The span program outputs 1 if the target vector t is in the
span of the vectors in U (a) and 0 otherwise.

1.1   Our Results
Our main result is an exponential lower bound against roABP-IPSLIN for a family of CNF formulas,
for any variable order and over any field. Namely, given the CNF formula, no roABP-IPSLIN
certificate of any variable order and sub-exponential size exists.

Theorem 1 (Main lower bound (informal); see Theorem 18). There is a family of CNF formulas
                                                                                             Ω(1)
Ψn in poly(n) variables and poly(n) clauses that requires roABP-IPSLIN refutations of size 2n     in
any variable ordering, and over any field.

     This resolves a problem left open by previous works on IPS lower bounds [FSTW21, HLT24,
For24, And25, EGLT26]; see also the discussion in Andrews [And25, Sec. 1.3]. Namely, whether one
can prove an IPS lower bound for an instance that is not a single polynomial equation and, more
importantly, for a genuinely Boolean instance: a direct arithmetization of a propositional formula,
specifically a CNF formula.
     The significance of this result is twofold. First, CNF formulas are the standard benchmark
instances in proof complexity. Second, as discussed above, they provide a direct connection to
Frege-style propositional proof systems: a lower bound for C-IPS on CNFs immediately implies
the same lower bound for any propositional proof system simulated by C-IPS. This implication
                                                                                       P         is
unavailable for purely algebraic instances, such as subset-sum equations of the form i ai xi − β
and their variants.
     For example, a lower bound against constant-depth IPS over Fp for a CNF would imply a
lower bound for AC0 [p]-Frege, a longstanding open problem. Although recent work of Elbaz et
al. [EGLT26] shows that even non-Boolean, namely purely algebraic, instances that are hard for
constant-depth IPS over finite fields imply a CNF lower bound via a general translation lemma, it
remains important to develop direct proof-size lower-bound methods for CNF formulas, in the hope
that such methods may eventually yield lower bounds against constant-depth IPS refutations.

   The family of hard CNF formulas Ψ is based on a lifting of the instance GENn introduced in
Raz and McKensize [RM99] (Theorem 11) and used throughout circuit and proof complexity (see in



                                                   5
particular Pitassi-Robere [PR18], Chan-Potechin [CP14] and Robere, Pitassi, Rossman, and Cook
[RPRC16]).
   The proof of Theorem 1 has three main steps:

   1. Interpolation;

   2. Hard monotone instance;

   3. Lifting.

   We describe these three steps in what follows.

Interpolation. We establish a general feasible interpolation result as follows. Let Ψ = ϕ0 (x, z) ∧
ϕ1 (y, z) be any split formula (with P0 being a set of sparse polynomials; e.g., when Ψ is a k-CNF,
for a small k). From a short roABP-IPSLIN refutation with a fixed variable order, refuting Ψ, we
show how to extract a small span program over the input z variables separating inputs for which
ϕ0 (x, z) is satisfiable from those inputs for which ϕ1 (y, z) is satisfiable. When the z variables are all
positive in ϕ0 or all negative in ϕ1 we extract a monotone span program, hence we call it “monotone
feasible interpolation”.

Theorem 2 (Feasible interpolation for roABP-IPSLIN ; see Theorem 9). Let P0 (x, z) and P1 (y, z)
be sets of polynomial equalities, where x, y and z are pairwise disjoint variables and P0 is a set of
sparse polynomials of polynomial degree (e.g., a translation of k-CNF, for a constant k). Suppose
that P0 ∪ P1 has an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width w in a variable ordering, where x variables
precede all other variables. Then there is a span program of size poly(w · |P0 (x, z)|) that computes
an interpolant for P0 and P1 . Moreover, if all the polynomials in P0 are monotone in z (see
Equation (5.1)), then the span program is monotone.

Proof idea: The proof has one central idea. Start with an roABP-IPSLIN refutation
      X          X
          ap p +    bq q = 1
      p∈P0           q∈P1

in a variable order where all x-variables come first. First, put P0 into z-normal form, so each
polynomial is either p0 (x) or p0 (x) + zj p1 (x), for some polynomials p0 (x), p1 (x) in the displayed
variables x only. Then use the roABP structure: since each ap is computed by a width-w roABP
and all x-variables appear first, cutting the roABP right after the last x-layer gives
            X
      ap =      ap,i (x) ri (y, z).
             i∈[w]

The span program is built from the x-parts ap,i : for each p0 (x) + zj p1 (x), add vectors labeled by zj
and 1 − zj , and for each p0 (x), add a constant-labeled vector. The target vector is 1.
    Why does this work? If the span program outputs 1 on an assignment α to z, then the selected
vectors already express 1 as a linear combination of the specialized polynomials from P0 (x, α),
so P0 (x, α) is unsatisfiable. Conversely, if it outputs 0 but P1 (y, α) were satisfiable, plugging a
satisfying y-assignment into the original refutation would kill the P1 -part and leave a refutation of
P0 (x, α); by the decomposition above, this refutation is again a linear combination of the selected
vectors, which contradicts the fact that the span program outputs 0. Thus the span program
computes an interpolant. If P0 is monotone in z, the construction is monotone as well.


                                                    6
Hard monotone instance. To make use of the above feasible monotone interpolation in order
to establish an actual proof size lower bound we need to find a monotone function that we know is
hard for monotone span programs. Moreover, we must be able to find a suitable polynomial-size
split formula Ψ, of which its interpolant is the hard monotone function. The idea is to use the
function GENn that was shown hard for monotone span programs by Robere, Pitassi, Rossman
and Cook [RPRC16, PR18]. Unlike [RPRC16, PR18], we do not need to insist on a function that is
computable by small monotone circuits, rather a general (non-monotone) circuit suffices. Hence, we
can use the general function GENn instead of the pyramid-based one in the previous works (see
Section 3.1).
    To form the split formula Ψ = ϕ0 (x, z) ∧ ϕ1 (y, z) whose interpolant is the hard instance for
monotone span programs we define it as follows. The formula ϕ0 (x, z) describes the negative
instances of GENn and ϕ1 (y, z) describes its positive instances. Also, because GENn is monotone,
the associated formulas can be constructed to be monotone in a sense that makes monotone
feasible interpolation applicable. Hence the interpolant extracted from a small refutation is a a
small monotone span program separating no-instances from yes-instances of GENn , shown hard in
[RPRC16, PR18].

Lifting. In the previous step we obtained a split formula that is hard for a specific order of variables
(when the x-variables come before the other variables). This does not rule out the possibility of a
small refutation for a different variable ordering. To rule this out, we apply a “lifting” process on
the split formula Ψ that, roughly, embeds all possible variable orders (see [FSTW21] and subsequent
work on lifting in IPS; and cf. [dRGR22] for general lifting in proof complexity). We explain it
informally in what follows.
    Our aim is to remove the dependence on a fixed variable order. In the previous step the hard
CNF ϕ = ϕ0 ∧ ϕ1 is only shown to be hard for roABP-IPSLIN refutations when the variables are
read in one specific order, say x1 < · · · < xN . Lifting constructs a larger CNF formula

      Ψ(v, u) = Φ1 (v, u) ∧ Φ2 (u)

such that, for every variable order < on the variables of Ψ, there is a substitution ρ< with the
following effect: ρ< assigns Boolean values to the auxiliary variables u, relabels the v-variables by
x1 , . . . , xN according to their order under <, and after this substitution the lifted clause part Φ1
becomes exactly the original hard CNF formula ϕ, while the “consistency part” Φ2 (see below) is
satisfied. Thus ϕ appears as a restricted instance of Ψ. Consequently, any roABP-IPSLIN refutation
of Ψ in order < yields, under ρ< , a refutation of ϕ in its hard order.
     The formula Φ1 (v, u) is the actual lift of ϕ. It uses new variables u and v. The v-variables are
the new main variables, whose order inside the refutation may be arbitrary. The u-variables are
selector variables. For each clause C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ) of ϕ, and for each triple (i, j, k) of distinct
indices, the variable uC,i,j,k says that the first, second, and third literals of C are realised on vi , vj , vk ,
respectively, with the same signs as in C (“realised” in the sense that there will be a relabelling of
v-variables by x-variables to recover the original instance). This is enforced by the implication
                      sg(ℓ )   sg(ℓ )  sg(ℓ ) 
          uC,i,j,k → vi 1 ∨ vj 2 ∨ vk 3 ,

together with clauses saying that for each original clause C, exactly one such triple is chosen. Hence
Φ1 embeds each clause of ϕ locally into the v-variables.
    However, these local choices could be inconsistent across different clauses. The same original
variable might correspond to different v-variables in different places. The role of Φ2 is to prevent
this. It is an auxiliary consistency gadget, not part of the original split ϕ0 ∧ ϕ1 . It checks that the

                                                        7
selected u-variables are globally consistent, meaning that local correspondences for each original
clause give rise to a global one-to-one correspondence between the original variables x and the new
variables v. Thus Φ2 is satisfiable exactly when the local choices in Φ1 come from one single global
relabelling.
    Now fix an arbitrary variable order < on Ψ, and let the induced order on the v-variables be

      vi1 < vi2 < · · · < viN .

This order determines the restriction ρ< . First, relabel vik 7→ xk for each k ∈ [N ]. Next, for each
clause C of ϕ, set exactly one selector variable uC,i,j,k to 1, namely the one corresponding to the
positions of the three variables of C in this v-order, and set all other selector variables for C to
0. Since this choice comes from one global relabelling, it is automatically globally consistent, and
therefore Φ2 can be satisfied by a suitable assignment to the u-variables. After this restriction, the
auxiliary gadget disappears and the lifted formula reduces to the original hard CNF ϕ, with the
surviving variables now ordered as x1 < · · · < xN .
    Therefore the restriction depends on the variable order <, but not on any further feature of
the proof. Once the order of the v-variables is fixed, the restriction is fixed as well. Hence a small
roABP-IPSLIN refutation of Ψ in any order would yield a small roABP-IPSLIN refutation of ϕ in its
hard order, contradicting the lower bound for a fixed order we obtained in the previous step. Hence,
Ψ is hard for roABP-IPSLIN in every variable order.

1.2   Connection to Previous Work
Feasible interpolation in proof complexity arose from the interaction between bounded arithmetic and
propositional proof systems. Early background appears in Krajı́ček–Pudlák [KP89] and in Razborov’s
work from the mid-1990s [Raz95a, Raz95b]. It was developed as a proof-complexity lower-bound
method by Bonet, Pitassi, and Raz [BPR97], and formulated explicitly in Krajı́ček [Kra97]. These
works formulated the method via communication complexity. Pudlák [Pud97] then gave a structural
interpolation theorem that extracts computation from proofs without going through communication
complexity. Our feasible interpolation theorem is most closely related to the monotone interpolation
theorem for algebraic proof systems due to Pudlák and Sgall [PS96], that extracts a small (monotone)
span program from a low degree algebraic proof.
    Feasible interpolation continued to play a major role in proof complexity throughout the years.
In particular, lower bounds on OBDD-based proof systems by Krajı́ček [Kra08] (cf. Segerlind
[Seg07, Seg08] for the tree-like case), used variable ordering arguments close to our constructions.
OBDD-based propositional proof systems were introduced by Atserias, Kolaitis, and Vardi [AKV04]
and further investigated in several later works (cf. [BIK+ 21, IRS17, IR22]).
    The ability to apply monotone feasible interpolation for monotone span programs stems from
the results of Robere, Pitassi, Rossman and Cook, and Pitassi-Robere [RPRC16, PR18].
    As for IPS refutations and specifically roABP-IPSLIN , this system was considered first in Forbes,
Shpilka, Tzameret and Wigderson [FSTW21]. They proved an exponential size lower bound for
this system alas for a single formula. All lower bounds against IPS and fragments are for either a
single algebraic instance [FSTW21, GHT22, HLT24, BLRS25, EGLT26, CGMS25, BHLS26]; or for
non-single axiom as in Andrews-Forbes [AF22], but there the instance is algebraic and the lower
bound is in the “placeholder model”, meaning that the hard instance against C-IPS cannot be
written by itself with a (small) circuit in the class C.




                                                  8
1.3   Concluding Discussion and Open Problems
The lower bound method developed here shows that, for roABP-IPSLIN , feasible interpolation
is not far from rank-based approaches as used in all previous (unconditional) IPS lower bounds
(namely, by reducing IPS refutation size lower bound to an algebraic circuit lower bound, where
the latter is established using a rank-argument). The key step in the interpolation theorem is to
cut each coefficient roABP at the interface between the x-variables and the remaining variables.
This yields a decomposition through a space of dimension at most the width of the roABP, and
this low-dimensional space is then converted into a span-program interpolant. Thus, at a higher
level, the argument has the same structure as a rank-argument used throughout algebraic circuit
complexity and previous IPS lower bounds: a small refutation gives rise to a low-dimensional object,
while hardness of the interpolant implies that every such object must be large. In our case, the first
ingredient is the roABP decomposition, and the second is the monotone span-program lower bound
for GENn .
    This also gives a more concrete explanation of the remark in [FSTW21] that the functional
lower-bound method is reminiscent of feasible interpolation. At least for roABP-based IPS, the
current work decreases the gap between these two methods.
    It is also instructive to compare the present result with lower bounds for OBDD-based proof
systems. The two settings are related in that both are sensitive to variable order, and both admit
lower-bound arguments that exploit this feature. However, the systems themselves are orthogonal.
The proof system studied here is algebraic and static, and it works with coefficients represented by
roABPs, which are strictly more expressive than OBDDs. By contrast, OBDD proof systems are
propositional, dynamic, and semantic. Therefore, the present lower bound should not be understood
as a direct analogue of OBDD lower bounds, but rather as an algebraic proof-complexity result that
shares with them only the order-sensitive aspect of the argument.
    Finally, the lower bound does not necessarily reflect a general weakness of roABP-IPSLIN . The
system also admits nontrivial upper bounds as we show in this work. In particular, as we show in
Section 5, Tseitin formulas have polynomial-width roABP-IPSLIN refutations in every variable order:
one can start from Grigoriev’s polynomial-sparsity Nullstellensatz refutation in the {±1} basis and
then apply a linear change of basis, which preserves small roABP width. And further roABP-IPSLIN
simulates tree-like PC proof length (number of lines) and efficiently refutes the functional pigeonhole
principle formulas.
    Regarding questions left open, the immediate problem is to see if feasible interpolation could
obtain CNF formulas hard against other fragments of IPS for which lower bounds are already
known for single-axiomed algebraic instances. These fragments include multilinear formula IPS
[FSTW21, HLT24] and constant-depth IPS refutations with low individual degrees as in [GHT22,
HLT24, EGLT26].
    On the other hand, strong enough proof systems, such as constant-depth IPS with no bounds
on individual degrees simulate AC0 [p]-Frege (when the IPS system works over the field Fp ; see
[GP18]) and plausibly TC0 -Frege (when the IPS system works over characteristic 0 fields). The
latter system TC0 -Frege is known not to have feasible interpolation property based on the hardness
of factoring [BPR00] (i.e., non-feasible interpolation follows assuming factoring Blum integers is not
in P/poly), and similarly the former system AC0 [p]-Frege does not have feasible interpolation unless
                                                                                     ϵ
the Diffie-Hellman function can be computed by subexponential-size circuits, i.e., 2n , for arbitrarily
small ϵ > 0 [BDG+ 99]. Hence, we cannot realistically hope for feasible interpolation to hold for
(unrestricted individual degree) constant-depth IPS refutations.




                                                  9
1.4    Follow-ups
After our work was presented in a talk, Dmitry Sokolov [Sok26] pointed out a way to lift general
Nullstellensatz degree lower bounds to roABP-IPSLIN refutation size lower bounds for a fixed variable
order. This is based on the algebraic tiling approach of Pitassi and Robere [PR18] (cf. [RPRC16]).
In this sense, one obtains CNF formulas hard against roABP-IPSLIN in a fixed variable order by
lifting any CNF formula that is hard for Nullstellensatz degree. Using the method developed in
Section 4, one can then extend the resulting lower bound to arbitrary variable orders.


2     Preliminaries
2.1    Notation
We use lower case over-lined Latin letters x, y, z, etc. to denote sequences of (Boolean) variables.
Single variables always have a subscript attached, e.g. xi or yj0 . We will use lower case over-lined
Greek letters α, β, γ etc. to denote Boolean assignments, whose domain will be clear from the
context.

2.2    Feasible interpolation
Let φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z) be an unsatisfiable propositional formula in pairwise disjoint sequences of
variables x, y and z. We call such formulas split formulas. It follows that for every given total
assignment to z, either φ0 (x, z) or φ1 (y, z) is unsatisfiable (or both are); this is because, a single
z-assignment for which both φ0 (x, z) and φ1 (y, z) are satisfiable, could be merged into a satisfying
assignment to φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z).
     The basic interpolation property for propositional logic, analogous to Craig interpolation in
first-order logic, guarantees the existence of a function I defined on the z-variables such that:
               (
                 0, if φ0 (x, α) is satisfiable;
       I(α) =
                 1, if φ1 (y, α) is satisfiable.

Note that this is identical to the following two conditions:

       If I(α) = 0, then φ1 (y, α) is unsatisfiable; and                                             (2.1)
       If I(α) = 1, then φ0 (y, α) is unsatisfiable.

Such a function I is called an interpolant for the conjunction φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z). The function is
well-defined, i.e. single-valued, by the assumption that the conjunction is unsatisfiable as explained
above.
    In the framework of feasible interpolation we are interested in the computational complexity of
the interpolants in terms of the sizes of the refutations of the propositional formulas. As such the
framework is a method to translate computational lower bounds to proof size lower bounds. We
say that a proof system P admits a feasible interpolation property with respect to a circuit model
C, if for any P-refutation of size s of a split formula φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z) there is a C-circuit of size
poly(s) that computes an interpolant for φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z). In the case that there exists monotone
function interpolating φ0 (x, z) ∧ φ1 (y, z) we say that the proof system P admits a monotone feasible
interpolation with respect to a monotone circuit model C if for any P-refutation there is a monotone
circuit from C that computes an interpolant.
    In the current work we consider algebraic proof systems that can be used more generally to
prove that a given set of polynomial equations over a field does not have 0-1 solutions. This is more

                                                   10
general than showing that a set of formulas in propositional logic is unsatisfiable (since propositional
formulas can be encoded directly by polynomial equations). The notion of interpolation generalises
naturally to this case, and we will prove our feasible interpolation result in this general setting.
Namely, let P0 (x, z) and P1 (y, z) be two sets of polynomials in the sequences of variables x, y and z
that are mutually unsatisfiable, i.e. that have no common (Boolean) root. A Boolean function I(z)
is an interpolant for P0 and P1 if it satisfies the following for every assignment α:
              (
                0, if P0 (x, α) is satisfiable;
      I(α) =
                1, if P1 (y, α) is satisfiable.

This is again equivalent to the following two conditions:

       If I(α) = 0, then P1 (y, α) is unsatisfiable; and                                                (2.2)
       If I(α) = 1, then P2 (y, α) is unsatisfiable.

The notions of feasible and monotone feasible interpolation translate directly to the setting with
general polynomial equalities.

2.3    Read-once Oblivious Algebraic Branching Programs
A variable ordering of a finite set of variables is a linear order on the set, e.g. x1 < . . . < xn . A read-
once oblivious algebraic branching program (roABP) [For14] in the variable ordering x1 < . . . < xn
consists of a sequence of matrices M1 , . . . , Mn so that Mi is a matrix whose entries are univariate
polynomials in the variable xi . The branching program computes the polynomial

      (M1 · · · Mn )(1,1) ,

i.e. the upper left entry of the product of these matrices. This definition assumes that all the
matrices here are of appropriate dimension so that the product is well-defined. The size measure
for such a branching program is defined in terms of width: the width of an roABP is the maximal
dimension of the matrices.
     Read-once oblivious algebraic branching programs can also be defined more combinatorially as a
layered directed graphs with two special vertices, the source in the first layer and the sink in the
last layer, and n − 1 layers in between. Each edge in the graph is between consecutive layers, that
is directed from layer i to layer i + 1. The edges between layer i and layer i + 1 are labelled with
univariate polynomials in the variable xi . Each source-to-sink path computes the polynomial that is
the product of all the univariate polynomials on the path, and the program itself computes the sum
of all the paths in the graph. It is not hard to see that these two definitions are equivalent. In this
formulation, the width of the program corresponds to the maximum size of any layer.
     There is a particular representation that is useful for our purposes below (cf. [For14]). If a
polynomial p is computable by a width w roABP in a variables ordering x1 < . . . < xn , then for
any i ∈ [n] it can be written as a sum
        X
            pij qij ,
      j∈[w]

where each pij is a polynomial in the variables x1 , . . . , xi and each qij is a polynomial in the variables
xi+1 , . . . , xn .



                                                     11
2.4    Algebraic Proof Systems
A Nullstellensatz proof system, introduced to proof complexity in [BIK+ 96], is based, as the name
suggests, on Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz. Here a Nullstellensatz proof of p = 0 from a sequence
p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 of polynomial equalities is a sequence q1 , . . . , qm of polynomials so that
      p = p1 q1 + . . . + pm qm .                                                                     (2.3)
A Nullstellensatz refutation of p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 is a Nullstellensatz proof of 1 = 0 from
p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0. The complexity of these proofs is most commonly measured by the maximum
degree of the summands, i.e. maxi deg(pi qi ), or by sparsity, or monomial-size, of the summands.
   Polynomial Calculus [CEI96] is a dynamic variant of Nullstellensatz, where the Nullstellensatz
proof is derived by local inference rules. A Polynomial Calculus proof of p = 0 from a sequence
p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 of polynomial equalities is a sequence q1 , . . . , qℓ of polynomials so that qℓ = p
and one of the following holds for every i ∈ [ℓ]:
   1. qi is one of the axioms, i.e. of the polynomials pj ;
   2. there is j < i and a variable x so that qi = xqj ;
   3. there are j, k < i and field elements a, b so that qi = aqj + bqk .
A Polynomial Calculus refutation a sequence p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 is again a proof of 1 = 0 from
the sequence. We say that the proof is tree-like if the underlying proof graph is a tree. Here the
common complexity measures are again the degree and sparsity of the polynomials in the sequence.
Another important measure for this work is the length of the proof, i.e. the number of polynomials
in the sequence; above this is ℓ.
    Ideal Proof System (IPS) [GP18] allows expressing the Nullstellensatz proof succinctly as a
single algebraic circuit. Formally we have the following definition.
Definition 3 (Ideal Proof System [GP18]). Let p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 be a sequence of polynomial
equalities in variables x1 , . . . , xn . An IPS proof of p = 0 from p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 is an algebraic
circuit C(x, z) in variables x1 , . . . , xn and new placeholder variables z1 , . . . , zm so that
   1. C(x, 0̄) = 0;
   2. C(x, p1 , . . . , pm ) = p.
An IPS refutation of the sequence p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 is an IPS proof of 1 = 0 from the sequence.
The size of the IPS proof is the circuit of C.
    Following [FSTW21] we call an IPS proof linear if the polynomial computed by the circuit C
computes a polynomial that is linear in the   P z variables ([GP18] calls this Hilbert-like IPS); the
polynomial computed is thus of the form i∈[m] qi (x)zi for some polynomials qi . The size of this
expression is roughly the size of the circuits computing the polynomials qi (x). Thus a linear IPS
proof can be considered as a Nullstellensatz proof, where the size of the proof is measured by the
algebraic circuit size of the polynomials q1 , . . . , qm in Equation (2.3)
    In this work we consider linear IPS proofs, where the polynomials q1 , . . . , qm in Equation (2.3)
are computed by read-once algebraic branching programs. We call these roABP-IPSLIN proofs. The
complexity of an roABP-IPSLIN proof is measured by the maximum width of an roABP needed to
compute any of the polynomials q1 , . . . , qm . We assume a common variable ordering for the whole
proof and the complexity of the proof can and usually will depend on this choice. To emphasize
the chosen variable ordering we talk about roABP-IPSLIN refutations in some particular variable
ordering.

                                                    12
2.4.1     A Translation from CNFs to Polynomials
In order to consider these systems as a refutation systems for CNFs weWfix a standard
                                                                                W     translation of
a set of clauses into a set of polynomial equations. For a clause C = i∈I xi ∨ j∈J ¬xj we define
its translation to be the polynomial
                Y            Y
       tr(C) :=    (1 − xi )    xj
                   i∈I        j∈J

and for a CNF F in variables x1 , . . . , xn consisting of clauses C1 , . . . , Cm we define its translation
to be the set

        {tr(Ci ) = 0 : i ∈ [m]} ∪ {x2i − xi = 0 : i ∈ [n]}.

2.5     Span Programs
A span program [KW93] consists of a labeled matrix (M, σ) together with a target vector t, where σ
is a labeling of the rows, i.e. a mapping from the rows of M to the literals in the variables z. We also
allow labeling a row with the constant 1. A span program is monotone, whenever there is no row
labeled with a negative literal. The size of the span program is the number of rows. Equivalently
define a span program as a set U of pairs (ℓ, v), where ℓ is a z-literal or a constant 1 and v is a
vector in some underlying vector space V together with a target vector t that lies also in the space.
    A span program as above computes a Boolean function as follows: on a 0-1 assignment a to
the variables z, let U (a) be the set of vectors v so that there is some literal ℓ with (ℓ, v) ∈ U and
ℓ(a) = 1. In other words, U (a) consists of all vectors picked by the assignment z, namely those
vectors whose z-label gets 1 under a. The span program outputs 1 if the target vector t is in the
span of the vectors in U (a) and 0 otherwise.
Remark 4. Usually span programs are defined as labeled only with literals and not with the
constant 1. This inclusion is only for convenience as there are simple reductions to get rid of the
constant. If the span program U is non-monotone, it suffices to replace each (1, v) with the pairs
(zi , v) and (z̄i , v) for some variable zi ; the size of the program only increases by a factor of two. If
the span program U is monotone, replace each (1, v) with the set of all the pairs (zi , v) for each
variable zi . The obtained program computes the same function unless the function is the constant
function 1 and the size increases only by a polynomial factor.


3     Feasible Interpolation Property for Fixed Variable Ordering
In this section we prove the feasible interpolation result for roABP-IPSLIN when the order of
variables queried along the roABPs is fixed.
     Before proceeding to the proof we show that we can assume a certain normal form for a given
set of polynomial constraints. This normal form was introduced by Pudlák and Sgall [PS96]
(cf. [FGGR22] for more recent uses).
Definition 5 (Monotone normal form). Let P (x, z) be a set of polynomials in the (pairwise disjoint)
sets of variables x, z.
    • P (x, z) is in a z-normal form if each polynomial in the set is of the form

              p + z i p′ ,

        for some polynomials p and p′ in the x variables and a single z-variable zi .

                                                      13
   • P (x, z) is monotone in z if each polynomial in the set is of the form
                   !
              Y
                 zi · p,                                                                             (5.1)
              i∈I

      where I is some subset of indices and p is a polynomial in the x variables only. Here,
      monotonicity is with respect to the z-variables (and not necessarily the x-variables), meaning
      that over 0-1 values to the z-variables, the polynomial is monotone in the following sense:
      when p is fixed and has a nonnegative value, flipping a zi from 0 to 1 can only increase the
      value of (5.1).

   • P (x, z) is in a monotone z-normal form if the size of the set of indices I in (5.1) is at most 1
     for every polynomial in the set. In other words, each of its polynomials is of the form zi p′ or
     p′ .
    In the below, sparsity(p), for a polynomial p, denotes the number of monomials in p, and we
also call sparsity(p) the sparse size of p.
LemmaP   6 (Normal form lemma). Let P (x, z) be a finite set of sparse polynomials over a field F.
Let s := p∈P sparsity(p) and n := |x| + |z|, and assume that every polynomial in P has degree at
most (s + n)O(1) . Then, there is a set P ′ (x, w, z) of polynomials, of sparsity poly(s + n) and where
w are fresh variables, such that:
  1. P ′ is in z-normal form, namely every polynomial in P ′ is of the form q(x, w) + zi q ′ (x, w), for
     some i, or contains no z-variable;

  2. for every assignment α ∈ {0, 1}|z| , P and P ′ are equisatisfiable in the following sense:

            ∃x ∈ {0, 1}|x| P (x, α) = 0      ⇐⇒      ∃x ∈ {0, 1}|x| ∃w ∈ F|w| P ′ (x, w, α) = 0;

  3. every polynomial p ∈ P has an roABP-IPSLIN derivation from P ′ of width poly(s + n), given
     any variable ordering.
   Moreover, if P is monotone in z, then P ′ can be chosen in monotone z-normal form.
Remark 7. The auxiliary variables w introduced in the lemma are algebraic extension variables;
they are not constrained by Boolean axioms. Thus satisfiability of P ′ (x, w, α) means satisfiability
by Boolean values for the original variables x and field values for the auxiliary variables w.
Proof: We give two different constructions depending on whether P is monotone in z or not.

Nonmonotone case. Assume first that P is not necessarily monotone in z. Introduce a fresh
auxiliary variable wi for every variable zi . For every polynomial p(x, z) ∈ P , let p⋆ (x, w) be obtained
from p by replacing each zi by wi . Define

      P ′ (x, w, z) := {p⋆ (x, w) : p ∈ P } ∪ {zi − wi : i ∈ [|z|]}.

Then P ′ is in z-normal form: each p⋆ contains no z-variable, and each zi − wi is of the form −wi + zi .
   The equisatisfiability condition is immediate. Indeed, after fixing an assignment α ∈ {0, 1}|z| ,
the equations zi − wi = 0 force wi = αi for every i. Hence

      p⋆ (x, w) = 0 for all p ∈ P

                                                      14
is equivalent to

       p(x, α) = 0 for all p ∈ P.

Thus

       ∃x ∈ {0, 1}|x| P (x, α) = 0                 ⇐⇒   ∃x ∈ {0, 1}|x| ∃w ∈ F|w| P ′ (x, w, α) = 0.   (7.1)

   It remains to derive every original polynomial p ∈ P from P ′ by a small roABP-IPSLIN derivation.
This is done using routine variable-by-variable substitution via a telescoping identity, as follows.
   Since p⋆ is already an axiom of P ′ , it suffices to derive p − p⋆ from the equations zi − wi . For a
monomial
                           k
                           Y
                       γ
       m(x, z) = cx              zij
                           j=1

of p, where repetitions among the indices ij are allowed, write
                               k
                               Y
         ⋆                 γ
       m (x, w) = cx                 wij .
                               j=1

Then the telescoping identity is
                                             
     Yk       Yk        Xk    Y           Y
        zij −    wij =          z ih     wig  (zij − wij ).
       j=1      j=1               j=1        h<j        g>j

Multiplying by cxγ gives a derivation of m − m⋆ from the equations zi − wi . Summing over all
monomials of p gives a derivation of p − p⋆ , and hence of p, from P ′ .
    Summing over all monomials of p gives a derivation of p − p⋆ , and hence of p, from P ′ . For each
equation zi − wi , the corresponding coefficient is a sum of at most sparsity(p) · deg(p) monomials
from the telescopic identity. A monomial has width-1 roABP in any variable ordering, and a sum of
T monomials has roABP width at most T by taking the sum of the width-1 roABPs. Hence every
coefficient in this derivation has roABP width at most sparsity(p) · deg(p), which is poly(s + n) by
assumption. Therefore each p ∈ P has an roABP-IPSLIN derivation from P ′ of width poly(s + n) in
any variable ordering.

Monotone case. Assume that P is monotone in z. Thus every polynomial p ∈ P is of the form
                   
               Y
   p(x, z) =    zi  p′ (x),
                      i∈Ip

where p′ (x) ∈ F[x]. If Ip = ∅, we keep p = p′ (x) unchanged. Otherwise, for every i ∈ Ip introduce a
fresh auxiliary variable wp,i , and replace p by the polynomials
               X
      p′ (x) +    wp,i ,    zi wp,i (i ∈ Ip ).
               i∈Ip

Let P ′ (x, w, z) be the union of these polynomials over all p ∈ P . Then P ′ is in monotone z-normal
form.

                                                               15
   The equisatisfiability condition is checked after fixing an arbitrary assignment α ∈ {0, 1}|z| to
the z-variables. Consider one polynomial
                       
                  Y
      p(x, z) =     zi  p′ (x)
                        i∈Ip

and the normalised equations associated with it:
              X
     p′ (x) +   wp,i = 0,    zi wp,i = 0 (i ∈ Ip ).
                 i∈Ip

We are trying to prove the following: for every fixed Boolean assignment α to the z-variables,
P (x, α) = 0 is satisfiable in Boolean x if and only if P ′ (x, w, α) = 0 is satisfiable in Boolean x and
field-valued w. So fix a Boolean assignment α to x. After substituting z = α, the original equation
becomes
              
         Y
           αi  p′ (x) = 0.
          i∈Ip

If all αi = 1 for i ∈ Ip , this is just p′ (x) = 0. On the normalised side, the equations αi wp,i = 0 force
all wp,i = 0, and hence the first normalised equation also becomes p′ (x) = 0.
    If some αi0 = 0, then the original equation becomes 0 · p′ (x) = 0, and hence imposes no condition
on x. The normalised equations impose no condition P          on x either: for any assignment to x, set
wp,i0 = −p′ (x) and set all other wp,i ’s to 0. Then p′ (x) + i∈Ip wp,i = 0, and all equations αi wp,i = 0
hold. Thus, for each fixed α, the normalised equations associated with p impose exactly the same
condition on x as the original equation p(x, α) = 0.
    Since the auxiliary variables used for different polynomials p ∈ P are disjoint, the same argument
applies independently to all polynomials in P . Therefore Equation (7.1) holds.
   It remains  to derive each original polynomial p from P ′ by a small roABP-IPSLIN derivation.
For p = ( i∈Ip zi )p′ (x), we have the identity
         Q
                                                                
        Y                   Y                  X          X    Y
          zi  p′ (x) =       zi  p′ (x) +   wp,i  −          zj  (zi wp,i ).       (7.2)
          i∈Ip                 i∈Ip                i∈Ip          i∈Ip   j∈Ip \{i}

Thus p is obtained as an roABP-IPSLIN linear combination of the polynomials introduced for p
whose coefficient polynomials are monomials in the z-variables. Hence these coefficients have width-1
roABPs in every variable ordering. In particular, the width of the derivation, measured by the
coefficient roABPs, is constant. Therefore every p ∈ P has an roABP-IPSLIN derivation from P ′ of
width poly(s + n) (in fact, of constant width).
    Finally, the total sparse size of P ′ is polynomial in s + n: for each p, the construction introduces
one polynomial of sparsity at most sparsity(p) + |Ip | and |Ip | monomial equations, and |Ip | ≤
deg(p) ≤ (s + n)O(1) .
    The following corollary sets how to apply Theorem 6. The argument is a simple use of composition
of proofs, while making proofs are not blowing up in roABP width when the order of variables is
kept x ∪ w < z ∪ y.
Corollary 8 (Normal form application). Let P0 (x, z) and P1 (y, z) be sets of polynomial equations,
where x, y, z are pairwise disjoint sets of variables. Assume that P0 is a set of polynomials of both
degree and sparsity poly(|x + z|).1 Suppose that P0 ∪ P1 has an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width w
  1
      For example, P0 may be the standard arithmetization of a k-CNF, for a constant k.


                                                          16
in a variable ordering in which the x-variables precede all other variables. Then, there is a set of
polynomial equalities P0′ (x′ , z), where
   • x′ , y, z are pairwise disjoint sets of variables.

   • P0′ is in z-normal form and has sparsity poly(|x + z|).

   • For every Boolean assignment α to the z-variables,

            P0 (x, α) is satisfiable        ⇐⇒     P0′ (x′ , α) is satisfiable.

     Consequently, the pairs (P0 , P1 ) and (P0′ , P1 ) define the same interpolation problem, and hence
     have the same interpolant.

   • P0′ ∪ P1 has an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width poly(w, |P0 |) in a variable ordering in which
     the x′ -variables precede both the y- and z-variables.
Moreover, if P0 is monotone in the z-variables then P0′ is in monotone z-normal form.
Proof: Apply Theorem 6 to P0 (x, z). Let P0′ (x, w, z) be the resulting set of polynomial equations,
and write x′ := (x, w). By Theorem 6, the set P0′ is in (monotone) z-normal form, has sparse size
polynomial in |x| + |z|, and for every assignment to the common variables z, the left-hand side
of the interpolation problem (i.e., P0 and P0′ ) has the same satisfiability status for P0 and for P0′ .
Consequently, the pairs (P0 , P1 ) and (P0′ , P1 ) define the same interpolation problem, and hence have
the same interpolant.
    It remains to show that the refutation of P0 ∪ P1 can be converted into a refutation of P0′ ∪ P1
with only a polynomial increase in width and in an ordering in which x′ -variables come before all
other variables. Let
       X                             X
          Rj (x, z, y) P0,j (x, z) +   Lt (x, z, y) P1,t (y, z) = 1                                 (8.1)
       j                                t

be the assumed roABP-IPSLIN refutation of P0 ∪ P1 of width w, where the P0,j enumerate the
polynomials of P0 and the P1,t enumerate the polynomials of P1 .
    By Theorem 6, for every j there is an roABP-IPSLIN derivation of P0,j from P0′ of width
poly(|x| + |z|). Thus we may write
                    X
                                      ′
      P0,j (x, z) =   Qi,j (x, w, z) P0,i (x, w, z),                                   (8.2)
                        i

where each coefficient Qi,j has an roABP of width poly(|x| + |z|) in any variable ordering.
   We now substitute the identities (8.2) into the refutation (8.1). This gives
                                                           !
         X                 X                                  X
                                              ′
     1=      Rj (x, z, y)     Qi,j (x, w, z) P0,i (x, w, z) +   Lt (x, z, y) P1,t (y, z)
            j                    i                                      t
                                                                                                      (8.3)
            X       X                                                   X
                                                      ′
        =              Rj (x, z, y) Qi,j (x, w, z) P0,i (x, w, z) +       Lt (x, z, y) P1,t (y, z).
            i       j                                                   t

This is a linear IPS refutation of P0′ ∪ P1 .
    It remains only to check the width and variable ordering. Extend the original variable ordering
so that all variables in x′ = (x, w) precede the variables in y, z. The original coefficients Rj and Lt

                                                         17
can be viewed as polynomials in the larger variable set by ignoring the new w-variables; this does
not increase their roABP width. The coefficients Qi,j have polynomial-width roABPs in this same
extended ordering by Theorem 6. Products of two roABPs in the same variable ordering can be
computed (while preserving the varaible ordering) by taking tensor products of the layers, so the
width multiplies2 . Sums of polynomially many such roABPs can be computed by taking their direct
sum (i.e., by putting them side by side in parallel), so the width increases by at most a polynomial
factor. Hence each coefficient
      X
          Rj Qi,j
          j

in (8.3) has roABP width poly(w, |P0 |), and the coefficients Lt retain width at most w in a variable
order in which x′ -variables precede both the y- and z-variables. Therefore, P0′ ∪ P1 has an roABP-
IPSLIN refutation of width poly(w, |P0 |) in this variable order.

       We are now ready to prove the feasible interpolation theorem.

Theorem 9 (Feasible interpolation for roABP-IPSLIN ). Let P0 (x, z) and P1 (y, z) be sets of polyno-
mial equalities, where x, y and z are pairwise disjoint variables and P0 is a set of polynomials of
both degree and sparsity poly(|x| + |z|). Assume that P0 is in z-normal form. Suppose that P0 ∪ P1
has a roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width w in a variable ordering where x variables precede all other
variables. Then there is a span program of size poly(w · |P0 (x, z)|) that computes an interpolant for
P0 and P1 . Moreover, if all the polynomials in P0 are in monotone z-normal form, then the span
program is monotone.

Proof: By Theorem 8 we can assume without loss of generality that P0 is in a (monotone) normal
form and let
      X         X
         ap p +   bq q = 1                                                                (9.1)
         p∈P0           q∈P1

be a refutation of P0 ∪ P1 .
   Note that, by the assumption that for every p ∈ P0 the polynomial ap is computable by a width
w read-once oblivious algebraic branching program, it can be written in the form
           X
      ap =      ap,i (x) · ri (y, z),                                                       (9.2)
                i∈[w]

for some polynomials ap,i in the x variables only and some polynomials ri in the y and z variables
only. Indeed, consider the layer of the roABP immediately after the last x-variable in the given
variable ordering (recall that the i-th layer in a roABP contains only edges labeled with univariate
polynomials in the i-th variable in the variable linear ordering). Since the roABP has width w, this
layer contains at most w nodes. For each node i ∈ [w], let ap,i denote the polynomial computed
from the source to node i, and let ri denote the polynomial computed from node i to the sink. Then
ap,i depends only on the x-variables, while ri depends only on the remaining variables, namely y, z.
   2
    We use the standard closure properties of roABPs in a fixed variable order. Suppose P and Q are computed in
the same variable order x1 < · · · < xn , with matrix presentations P = (A1 · · · An )1,1 and Q = (B1 · · · Bn )1,1 , where
Ai and Bi are the matrices for the xi -layer. For each i, define the xi -layer of the product roABP to be Ci = Ai ⊗ Bi .
Then, C1 · · · Cn = (A1 ⊗ B1 ) · · · (An ⊗ Bn ) = (A1 · · · An ) ⊗ (B1 · · · Bn ), where the rightmost equality is by basic tensor
calculus. Hence the output entry of the product roABP equals (A1 · · · An )1,1 (B1 · · · Bn )1,1 = P Q. If the widths of the
two roABPs are wP and wQ , then the matrices Ci have dimension at most wP wQ , so the width is at most wP wQ .


                                                               18
Summing over all nodes in this layer gives the polynomial ap . If the layer has fewer than w nodes,
we pad the decomposition by setting the missing ap,i ’s equal to 0.
   We now construct the span program I as follows:
   1. For any polynomial p ∈ P0 of the form p′ + zj p′′ add to the span program the entries
            zj , ap,i (p′ + p′′ ) and (1 − zj , ap,i p′ ), for all i ∈ [w].
                                 

      Thus, if zj = 1 the span program picks the vector ap,i (p′ + zj p′′ ) = ap,i (p′ + p′′ ); while if zj = 0
      the span program picks the vector ap,i (p′ + zj p′′ ) = ap,i p′ .
   2. For any polynomial p ∈ P0 of the form p′ (i.e., no z-variables appear in the polynomial) add
      to the span program the entries
             (1, ap,i p′ ), for all i ∈ [w].

   3. The target vector is the constant polynomial 1.
Note that if P0 is monotone in the z-variables then this span program is monotone, because in this
case p ∈ P0 is of the form p′ + zj p′′ with p′ = 0, hence (1 − zj , ap,i p′ ) = (1 − zj , 0) can be discarded
from the span program.
    We claim that the constructed span program computes an interpolant for P0 and P1 , namely,
the conditions in (2.2) are met: if I(α) = 1 then P0 (x, α) is unsatisfiable; and if I(α) = 0 then
P1 (y, α) is unsatisfiable.
    We consider the two cases separately. Suppose first that the span program I outputs 1 on
an input α. The program outputs 1, when the constant polynomial 1 is in the linear span of
the vectors selected by α. Note that by Item 1 above these vectors correspond to polynomials in
P0 (x, α) multiplied by the polynomials ap,i . Thus expressing 1 as a linear span of these polynomials
constitutes a Nullstellensatz refutation of P0 (x, α), and so P0 (x, α) is unsatisfiable.
    Otherwise, suppose that the span program I outputs 0 on an input α. Suppose towards a
contradiction that P1 (y, α) is satisfiable and let β be an assignment to the y variables that satisfies
P1 (y, α) (so P1 vanishes under α, β). Applying both α and β to the given refutation (9.1) it simplifies
to a refutation of P0 (x, α):
       X
            ap (x, β, α)p(x, α) = 1.
      p∈P0

Moreover, by Equation (9.2), for every p ∈ P0 the polynomial ap (x, β, α) is a linear combination of
the polynomials ap,i (x), for i ∈ [w]:
                    X
     ap (x, β, α) =      ap,i (x) · ri (β, α).                                                 (9.3)
                      i∈[w]

The polynomials ap (x, β, α)p(x, α) are thus linear combinations of the vectors selected by α, and
the span program should have output 1, concluding the proof.
    Note that Equation (9.3) is the crucial equality allowing us to conclude the theorem: for this
equality to hold we must be able to write the left hand side as a linear combination of ap,i (x), for
i ∈ [x]. This is only possible because the variables y, z come after the x-variables in the variable
ordering, so that the ri (β, α) become constant.
Remark 10. The statement of Theorem 9 in the monotone case can be applied to a slightly more
general class of formulas. This is done by observing that the monotone case in Theorem 6 does not
depend on sparsity in the sense that the monotone feasible interpolation in Theorem 9 is applicable
for every monotone P0 so that the polynomials in it are computable by low-width roABPs.

                                                     19
3.1   Application: Lower Bounds for Fixed Variable Ordering
In this section we use the monotone feasible interpolation theorem of the previous section to
obtain lower bounds against roABP-IPSLIN . For this we will require the following lower bounds for
monotone span programs.

Definition 11 (GENn function hard for monotone span programs [PR18]). For a positive integer
n, let T ⊆ [n]3 be a set of triples. We say that T generates a point w ∈ [n] if either w = 1, or there
exists a triple (u, v, w) ∈ T such that T generates both u and v. The function GENn takes as input
the characteristic vector of a set T ⊆ [n]3 and outputs 1 if and only if T generates the point n.

    Equivalently, starting from the initially generated point 1, repeatedly add a point w whenever
there is a triple (u, v, w) ∈ T such that both u and v have already been generated. Then GENn (T ) = 1
if and only if this process eventually generates n.

Theorem 12 ([RPRC16, PR18]). The monotone function GENn is computable in polynomial time.
                                                                                  Ω(1)
Furthermore, over any field any monotone span program computing f requires size 2n .

    The following lemma gives a way to transform monotone functions computable by small circuits
into monotone propositional formulas describing the yes and no instances of the function respectively.
A similar construction appeared in [RPRC16] starting from a monotone circuit. The lemma below is
a non-uniform analogue of the general construction of an unsatisfiable split formula from a disjoint
NP pair [Kra97]. We include the proof for completeness, and to note that the circuit itself need not
be monotone as long as the function is.

Lemma 13. For any monotone function f ∈ NP/poly ∩ coNP/poly there are polynomial sized
3-CNF formulas ϕ0 (x, z) and ϕ1 (y, z) so that

   • f (α) = 0 if and only if ϕ0 (x, α) is satisfiable;

   • f (α) = 1 if and only if ϕ1 (y, α) is satisfiable;

   • the z-variables appear in ϕ0 (x, z) only negatively and in ϕ1 (y, z) only positively.

Proof: We construct first the formula ϕ0 . For this let C(z, w) be a polynomial size nondeterministic
circuit computing the negation of f , where z are the input variables and w the nondeterministic
variables; its existence is guaranteed by the fact that f ∈ coNP/poly. To define ϕ0 introduce for
each gate g of the circuit C a new variable xg , and construct ϕ0 as follows:

   • if g is a ◦-gate, where ◦ ∈ {∧, ∨} with children g0 and g1 , include in ϕ0 the clauses encoding
     the following formula xg ↔ (xg0 ◦ xg1 );

   • if g is a ¬-gate with a child g0 , include in ϕ0 the clauses encoding the formula xg ↔ ¬xg0 ;

   • for the output gate g, include in ϕ0 the clause xg ;

   • finally for each input gate g labeled with a variable zi , include in ϕ0 the clause ¬zi ∨ xg .

The constructed CNF satisfies the last condition. We will prove the first condition. Suppose first
that f (α) = 0. Then there is some assignment β to the w variables so that C(α, β) = 1. We can
satisfy ϕ0 (x, α) by assigning the input gate variables xg according to the assignments α and β and
the intermediate variables so that they respect the required conditions. Suppose then that ϕ(x, α) is
satisfiable, and let γ be the assignment to the gate variables corresponding to gates labeled with z

                                                   20
variables. By rewiring we may assume that there is a single input gate labeled with any z variables,
and thus |γ| = |α|. As γ is a part of a satisfying assignment of ϕ0 (x, α) we have that f (γ) = 0. Also
α ≤ γ as ϕ0 contains the clauses ¬zi ∨ xg . Hence f (α) ≤ f (γ) = 0 as f is monotone.
    The formula ϕ1 (y, z) is constructed similarly using the nondeterministic circuit for f itself
with the modification that for input gate g labeled with variable zi , we include in ϕ1 the clause
zi ∨ ¬yg .

    With Theorem 9 and the existing monotone span program lower bounds of [RPRC16, PR18] we
are ready to prove the main theorem of this section.

Theorem 14. There is an unsatisfiable 3-CNF ϕ0 (x, y) ∧ ϕ1 (y, z) that requires roABP-IPSLIN
                        Ω(1)
refutations of width 2N      in any variable ordering where x variables precede all the other variables,
where N is the number of variables in the formula.

Proof: Consider the function GENn , and note that it is indeed computable in polynomial time by
iteratively closing the initially generated set {1} under the triples in T . In particular, it belongs
to NP/poly ∩ coNP/poly. Thus, let ϕ0 (x, z) and ϕ1 (y, z) be the formulas encoding the no and yes
instances of the function GENn , respectively, given by Theorem 13. The obtained 3-CNF has poly(n)
variables and poly(n) clauses, and all the z variables appear only negatively in ϕ0 (x, z).
    Suppose there is an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of ϕ0 (x, z) ∧ ϕ1 (y, z) of width w in some variable
ordering where z variables precede the y and z variables. Note that the standard polynomial
translation of ϕ0 (x, z) is in monotone z-normal form. Thus, by Theorem 9 there is a size poly(n · w)
monotone span program computing an interpolant I for ϕ0 (x, z) ∧ ϕ1 (y, z).
    To finish the proof it suffices to note that the computed interpolant is exactly the function
GENn . To see this note that the interpolant I satisfies
              (
                0, if ϕ0 (x, α) is satisfiable;
      I(α) =
                1, if ϕ1 (y, α) is satisfiable;

and so by the construction of ϕ0 (x, z) and ϕ1 (y, z) it satisfies
             (
               0, if GENn (α) = 0
     I(α) =
               1, if GENn (α) = 1.

Thus the function has size poly(n · w) monotone span programs, and so, by Theorem 12 we have
           Ω(1)                                      Ω(1)
that w ≥ 2n . As N = poly(n) it follows that w ≥ 2N       .


4    Lower Bounds for Arbitrary Variable Ordering
In this section, we build a single family of unsatisfiable CNF formulas, such that each CNF requires
large roABP-IPSLIN refutations in every variable ordering. A natural strategy that has been
employed in such settings is to use the hard instance defined in the previous section, which we
showed is hard for a fixed variable ordering, and then lift that instance to obtain a lower bound for
all variable orderings.

Background on lifting in algebraic proof complexity. The first roABP-IPSLIN lower bound
for all variable order was proved in [FSTW21] for an algebraic instance built in the subset sum. In



                                                   21
their work, they first prove that the following unsatisfiable algebraic formula (a polynomial equation)
is hard to refute by an roABP-IPSLIN refutation in a fixed variable ordering, namely u < v.
                                                  X
                                       f (u, v) :   ui vi − β = 0,
                                                 i∈[n]

where β ∈
        / {0, 1, . . . , n}. Next, they construct another hard instance, using two new sets of variables,
namely z = {zi,j } for i, j ∈ [2n] and {xi } for i ∈ [2n]. Specifically, they create the following instance:
                                                 X
                                       g(z, x) :    zi,j xi xj − β = 0,
                                               i<j

                       n
                        
where β ∈ / {0, 1, . . . , 2 }. The main idea is that for any order σ of the x variables, there exists a
Boolean assignment to the z variables and a projection of x variables to u and v variables that
recovers the original hard instance. Hence, if the original instance can be obtained as a projection
of the new instance, then the lower bound proved for the original instance carries over to the new
instance. They call g(z, x) as the lifted instance of f (u, v). This lifting idea is used by other IPS
lower bounds such as [GHT22, HLT24, EGLT26].
    In all the above works, the input instances were purely algebraic and not a CNF formula.
    It is worth noting that the question of proving lower bounds for all variable orders naturally
occurs in the context of OBDD-based proof systems, which are propositional proof systems operating
with ordered binary decision diagrams (introduced by Atserias, Kolaitis and Vardi [AKV04]). This
is addressed in the works of Krajı́ček [Kra08], Segerlind [Seg07], and a recent work of [BIK+ 21].
While there are some similarities between our proof strategy and that of [Kra08], the arguments are
different.

4.1    The Hard Instance
Here we describe our construction of the hard instance. We start by fixing some notation.
    Let us call the hard 3-CNF formula from the previous section ϕ = ϕ0 ∧ ϕ1 . From this formula, we
will build a new hard instance, which we call Ψ. Let us denote the variables of the original instance
ϕ by x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } and assume that it is hard in the variable ordering x1 < . . . < xN . Let
the clauses in ϕ be denoted by C1 , C2 , . . . , CM . A specific clause C in this formula is a conjunction
of at most three literals, i.e., C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ). Moreover, for a literal ℓ in C, let var(ℓ) denote the
variable corresponding to the literal ℓ and sg(ℓ) denote the sign of that literal.

    The hard instance Ψ we construct has two sets of variables denoted u and v, where |v| = N and
|u| = O(M · N 3 ). Our construction guarantees the following properties.

   • Ψ(u, v) = Φ1 (u, v) ∧ Φ2 (u), where Φ1 is a CNF over the variables u, v and Φ2 is a CNF over u
     variables.

   • Additionally, Ψ(u, v) is unsatisfiable. Specifically, for every Boolean assignment α to u exactly
     one of the following two holds:

         – either Φ2 (α) is not satisfied;
         – or Φ2 (α) is satisfied and there exists a relabelling of v variables by x variables such that
           Φ1 (α, v) reduces to ϕ, the hard instance for the fixed variable order (hence, Φ1 (α, v) is
           unsatisfiable).


                                                     22
    Overall, let ϕ be the hard instance from Section 3.1, which is hard in the variable order σ. The
construction ensures that Ψ is unsatisfiable and that, for every ordering of the variables u, v, there
is a Boolean assignment to the u-variables and a relabelling of the v-variables by the x-variables
that produces ϕ in the order σ. This yields a lower bound for all variable orders. Based on this
idea, we construct Ψ in two stages.

Stage 1: local realisation of the clauses. This stage should be viewed as a lift of the original
instance. We define the variables u, v and the first part Φ1 of the lifted formula. There are N variables
v = {v1 , . . . , vN }, which will serve as renamed copies of the original variables x = {x1 , . . . , xN }.
The role of the u-variables is to specify, clause by clause, how a clause of the original formula ϕ is
realised on the v-variables.
    For every clause
      C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 )
of ϕ, and for every triple of distinct indices i, j, k ∈ [N ], we introduce a selector variable uC,i,j,k .
Hence, there are O(M · N 3 )-many u variables. Intuitively, setting uC,i,j,k = 1 means that, in the
lifted copy of the clause C, the variables underlying the literals ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓ3 are represented by vi , vj , vk ,
respectively. We enforce this local copy of C by adding the clause
                    sg(ℓ1 )      sg(ℓ2 )      sg(ℓ3 )
      ¬uC,i,j,k ∨ vi          ∨ vj         ∨ vk         .                                                    (14.1)
Thus, whenever the selector uC,i,j,k is set to 1, the formula contains the clause obtained from C
by replacing var(ℓ1 ), var(ℓ2 ), var(ℓ3 ) with vi , vj , vk , respectively, while preserving the signs of the
literals.
Definition 15. The formula Φ1 is the conjunction of all clauses of the form (14.1), for all clauses
C in ϕ and all triples i ̸= j ̸= k ∈ [N ].
    At this stage, different clauses may choose their triples independently, so the same original
variable might be represented by different v-variables in different clauses, or two different original
variables might be represented by the same v-variable. The role of the second stage will be to add a
consistency formula Φ2 over the u-variables, forcing the selected local realisations to come from one
global relabelling of the original variables by the v-variables.

Stage 2: enforcing global consistency. The purpose of the second part Φ2 of the lifted formula
is to ensure that the local choices made by the selector variables u in Stage 1 are compatible with a
single global relabelling of the original variables x by the new variables v.
    Recall that, for every clause
      C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 )
and every triple of distinct indices i, j, k ∈ [N ], the variable uC,i,j,k says that the variables underlying
the literals ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓ3 are realised by vi , vj , vk , respectively. Thus, if uC,i,j,k = 1, it defines the partial
map
      πC,i,j,k = { vi 7→ var(ℓ1 ), vj 7→ var(ℓ2 ), vk 7→ var(ℓ3 ) }.
We say that two selector variables uC,i,j,k and uD,a,b,c are compatible if the union of their correspond-
ing partial maps is still a one-to-one partial map from v to x. Equivalently, they are incompatible if
either the same v-variable is mapped to two different x-variables, or two different v-variables are
mapped to the same x-variable.
    The formula Φ2 enforces the following two conditions.

                                                            23
   1. For every clause C of φ, exactly one of the variables uC,i,j,k is set to 1. We add the clauses
                        _
                                     uC,i,j,k
             i,j,k∈[N ] distinct

      and, for every two distinct triples (i, j, k) ̸= (i′ , j ′ , k ′ ),

             ¬uC,i,j,k ∨ ¬uC,i′ ,j ′ ,k′ .

   2. We rule out incompatible local choices. Namely, for every two clauses C, D of ϕ, and every
      two triples of distinct indices (i, j, k) and (a, b, c), if the two partial maps

             πC,i,j,k          and             πD,a,b,c

      are incompatible, then we add the clause

             ¬uC,i,j,k ∨ ¬uD,a,b,c .

Definition 16. Let Φ2 be the conjunction of all clauses introduced above in Items 1 and 2

    Thus, Φ2 has size polynomial in N and M : the number of selector variables is at most M N 3 ,
and the consistency clauses are obtained by checking pairs of selector variables.
    By construction, an assignment to the u-variables satisfies Φ2 if and only if, for every clause C, it
chooses exactly one local realisation of C, and all chosen local realisations are mutually compatible.
Equivalently, the selected partial maps combine into one global one-to-one partial map from the
relevant v-variables to the original variables x. Thus, whenever Φ2 is satisfied, the clauses selected
in Φ1 form a relabelled copy of the original formula ϕ. More formally, we have the following.

Proposition 17. The CNF Ψ(u, v) = Φ1 (u, v) ∧ Φ2 (u) is unsatisfiable.

Proof: Let α be an arbitrary Boolean assignment to the u-variables. If α does not satisfy Φ2 , then
clearly α has no extension to the v-variables that satisfies Ψ. Thus assume that α satisfies Φ2 .
    By the definition of Φ2 , for every clause C of ϕ there is a unique triple (i, j, k) such that
α(uC,i,j,k ) = 1, and all the partial maps selected in this way are mutually compatible. In other words,
these partial maps combine into a single one-to-one partial map from the relevant v-variables to the
original variables x. Equivalently, there is a single one-to-one partial map π from the v-variables to
the original variables x such that, for every clause C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ) of ϕ, if uC,i,j,k is the selector
that is set to 1, then π(vi ) = var(ℓ1 ), π(vj ) = var(ℓ2 ), and π(vk ) = var(ℓ3 ).
    Now restrict Φ1 by the assignment α. Let C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ) be a clause of ϕ, and let (i, j, k) be
the unique triple selected for C. All clauses of Φ1 corresponding to unselected triples are satisfied,
since their selector variable is set to 0. The selected triple leaves the clause
       sg(ℓ1 )      sg(ℓ2 )      sg(ℓ3 )
      vi         ∨ vj         ∨ vk         .

By the global compatibility of the selected partial maps, these remaining clauses are exactly a
relabelled copy of the clauses of ϕ, with signs preserved. Since ϕ is unsatisfiable, no assignment to
the v-variables satisfies Φ1 (α, v). Hence no extension of α satisfies Ψ. Since α was arbitrary, Ψ is
unsatisfiable.




                                                          24
4.2    Lower Bound against roABP-IPSLIN for All Variable Orders
We are now ready to prove the main lower bounds result.

Theorem 18 (Main lower bound). The CNF Ψ(u, v) = Φ1 (u, v) ∧ Φ2 (u) requires roABP-IPSLIN
                        Ω(1)
refutations of width 2N      in any variable ordering.

Proof: Let < be an arbitrary variable ordering of the variables of Ψ, and suppose that Ψ has an
roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width w in this order. Recall that N is the number of v-variables, which
is the number of variables in the original hard instance ϕ = ϕ0 ∧ ϕ1 denoted x1 , . . . , xN . Consider
the order induced by < on the v-variables, and write it as

      vi1 < vi2 < · · · < viN .

We define a restriction depending only on this induced order. First relabel vir as xr , for every r ∈ [N ].
Next assign the u-variables as follows. For every clause C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ) of ϕ (in the x-variables) set
to 1 the unique uC,i,j,k for which vi , vj , vk are the v-variables relabelled as var(ℓ1 ), var(ℓ2 ), var(ℓ3 ),
respectively. Set all other variables associated with C to 0.
    This assignment to the u-variables satisfies Φ2 : it selects exactly one triple for each clause, and
all selected triples arise from the single global relabelling vir 7→ xr . Therefore all compatibility
clauses in Φ2 are satisfied. Under the same restriction, every clause of Φ1 whose selector uC,i,j,k is
assigned 0 is satisfied by the literal ¬uC,i,j,k . For each original clause C = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3 ) of ϕ, exactly
one variables uC,i,j,k is assigned 1, and the corresponding clause (14.1) of Φ1 reduces to
       sg(ℓ1 )      sg(ℓ2 )      sg(ℓ3 )
      vi         ∨ vj         ∨ vk         .

By the definition of the assignment to the u-variables and the relabelling vir 7→ xr , this reduced
clause is precisely the original clause C. Hence the restriction of Φ1 is exactly ϕ. Thus the restricted
formula is precisely ϕ, with its variables ordered as x1 < · · · < xN .
    Applying this restriction to the assumed roABP-IPSLIN refutation of Ψ gives an roABP-IPSLIN
refutation of ϕ in the order x1 < · · · < xN . The width does not increase under substituting constants
for the u-variables and relabelling the remaining v-variables: in the roABP, this only substitutes
constants into edge labels and renames variables, while preserving the layered computation.
    Hence ϕ has an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width at most w in the hard order x1 < · · · < xN .
                                   Ω(1)
By Theorem 14, we get w ≥ 2N            . Since the original order < was arbitrary, the same lower bound
holds for every variable ordering.


5     Simulations and Upper Bounds
Here we provide information on the strength of roABP-IPSLIN . We show a simulation of a (dynamic)
tree-like PC refutation systems in which each proof-line is written as a roABP in a fixed global
order. Then we provide polynomial-size upper bounds for Tseitin and the functional pigeonhole
principle.

5.1    roABP-IPSLIN Simulates Tree-Like Polynomial Calculus Length
In this section we show that roABP-IPSLIN simulates the tree-like Polynomial Calculus as long
as the initial polynomial equalities can be written as small-width roABPs. The simulation shows
that for simple axioms (computable by constant width roABPs) a length ℓ Polynomial Calculus
refutation can be transformed into an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of width O(ℓ). This result holds

                                                      25
irrespective of the way the intermediate polynomials are represented in the tree-like Polynomial
Calculus refutation as long as they are derived using the two local rules of the system.

Proposition 19. Let p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 be an unsatisfiable set of polynomial equalities, and suppose
each polynomial pi is computable by width w roABP in some fixed variable ordering.
    If there is a tree-like Polynomial Calculus refutation of p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 of length l, then there
is an roABP-IPSLIN refutation of p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0 of width at most ℓ · w.

Proof: Let q1 , . . . , qℓ be a tree-like Polynomial Calculus refutation of p1 = 0, . . . , pm = 0. Denote by
si the size of the sub-tree of the derivation tree rooted at qi . We prove by induction that qi has an
roABP-IPSLIN derivation of width at most si · w for each i ∈ [ℓ].
    If qi = pj for some j ∈ [m], the claim is clear, since pj can be computed by width w roABP. If
qi = xqj for some j < i and some variable x, the claim is also clear, since if qj has an roABP-IPSLIN
derivation of width w′ , then qi has also, since multiplying the derivation by a single variable does
not increase its width. Finally, suppose that qi = aqj + bqk for some j, k < i and a, b ∈ F. By
induction assumption, qj and qk have roABP-IPSLIN derivations of width at most sj · w and sk · w
respectively. Hence qi has an roABP-IPSLIN derivation of width at most (sj + sk ) · w, which is less
than si · w, since the Polynomial Calculus refutation is tree-like.

5.2    Upper Bounds for Tseitin Formulas and the Functional Pigeonhole Principle
Lastly, we discuss upper bounds for the proof system roABP-IPSLIN . We will observe that Tseitin
formulas have polynomial width roABP-IPSLIN refutations in any variable ordering and show that
functional pigeonhole principle has polynomial width roABP-IPSLIN refutations in a particular
ordering of the involved variables.
    In algebraic proof complexity, the restriction to Boolean domain is often imposed by including
the Boolean axioms x2 − x for all variables as is done also by . This forces the variables to
take values from the set {0, 1}. This is not however the only possible choice; another common
choice is to represent the Boolean values by {±1} by including the axioms x2 − 1 for all variables.
Although there is a simple linear transformation between these different representation certain
complexity measures are sensitive to the choice of representation. For an example the sparsity,
or monomial-size, measure can blow-up in this transformation; Tseitin formulas have polynomial
sparsity Nullstellensatz refutations in the {±1} basis [Gri98], but over {0, 1} require exponential
sparsity even in the stronger Sum-of-Squares proof system [AH19].
    The roABP-IPSLIN refutations on the other hand are not sensitive for this choice of basis: the
linear transformation is applied individually for each variable and thus does not increase the width
of the underlying roABPs. This observation shows that the lower bounds presented in this paper in
fact give lower bounds over any representation of the Boolean values. Conversely, any upper bounds
translate between the different Boolean bases.
    Recall the Tseitin formulas Ts(G, ν) [Tse68]. A charge on an undirected graph G is mapping ν
that assigns a value ν(u) ∈ {0, 1} to each vertex u ∈ V (G). The charge is odd, if the number of
vertices with charge 1 is odd. Tseitin’s formulas are defined over set of variables xe for each edge
e ∈ E(V ) and consists of the parity formulas
        M
              xe = ν(u)
      e∈E(V ):
        u∈e

for each u ∈ V (G). The set of formulas is unsatisfiable for any graph with an odd charge. If the
graph is of constant degree, the parity formulas can be written as small-width CNFs. Observe,

                                                     26
however, that the formulas can always be written with small-width roABPs in any variable ordering.
This observation allows us to state the following proposition.

Proposition 20. For any graph G with an odd charge ν the Tseitin formula Ts(G, ν) has a width
poly(n) roABP-IPSLIN refutation in any variable ordering.

Proof: Grigoriev has shown that Tseitin formulas have polynomial sparsity Nullstellensatz refutation
over the {±1} basis. The sparse polynomials in the refutation can be written as low-width roABPs
in any variable ordering, one path for each monomial. After applying the linear transformation
x 7→ (1 − x)/2 to each variable, we are left with a low-width roABP-IPSLIN refutation of the Tseitin
formula in the {0, 1} basis.

   Secondly, we will show that the functional pigeonhole principle can be refuted in small width
roABP-IPSLIN in a particular variable ordering. Recall that the propositional encoding FPHPn+1
                                                                                            n   of
the functional pigeonhole principle consists of the following clauses:

   • k∈[n] xik for all i ∈ [n + 1];
      W
                                                                                   (pigeon axioms)

   • ¬xik ∨ ¬xjk for all distinct i, j ∈ [n + 1] and all k ∈ [n];               (pigeonhole axioms)

   • ¬xik ∨ ¬xiℓ for all i ∈ [n + 1] and all distinct k, ℓ ∈ [n].             (functionality axioms)

   We consider the variable ordering where variables are ordered by the pigeonhole: xik < xjℓ ,
whenever k < ℓ. The argument given below is similar to the upper bound given for constant-depth
IPS in [HLT24], which in turn borrowed from the upper bounds in [GH03] and [RT08a].

Proposition 21. FPHPn+1   n    has width poly(n) roABP-IPSLIN refutations in the variable ordering
by the pigeonhole.
                                                                                       P
Proof: First note that the pigeon axioms can be written equivalently in the form 1 − k∈[n] xik and
that this equivalence is easily derivable from the standard translation of the pigeon axioms and the
functionality axioms as
           X          Y                X           Y
      1−       xik =      (1 − xik ) −     xik xiℓ   (1 − xiℓ′ ).
          k∈[n]       k∈[n]           k<ℓ       ℓ′ >ℓ

The weights on the functionality axioms above have a constant width read-once oblivious algebraic
branching programs. The sum of all these representations of the pigeon axioms equals
              X X
     n+1−               xik
              i∈[n+1] k∈[n]
                                                                P
Define the following short-hand: denote by yk the polynomial i∈[n+1] xik . This polynomial is
Boolean valued as yk2 − yk can be easily derivable from the hole axioms and the Boolean axioms.
Now write the sum of all pigeon axioms in the form
              X
     n+1−         yk .
              k∈[n]

This is an unsatisfiable subset sum instance in the y variables; its unique multilinear refutation is
symmetric and can thus be written as a linear combination of elementary symmetric polynomials
([FSTW21] gives an explicit expression). As elementary symmetric polynomials have small width

                                                   27
read-once oblivious algebraic branching programs, this subset sum instance has small width roABP-
IPSLIN refutations in the y variables in Pthe variable ordering y1 < . . . < yn .
    Finally apply the substitution yk 7→ i∈[n+1] xik to the refutation of the subset sum instance to
obtain a refutation of the functional pigeonhole principle. The width of the refutation stays small
since the chosen variable ordering interleaves with the ordering on the y variables: xik < xjℓ for any
k < ℓ.


References
[AF22]     Robert Andrews and Michael A. Forbes. Ideals, determinants, and straightening: proving and
           using lower bounds for polynomial ideals. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2022, page 389–402, New York, NY, USA, 2022.
           Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 8
[AH19]     Albert Atserias and Tuomas Hakoniemi. Size-degree trade-offs for sums-of-squares and Positivstel-
           lensatz proofs. In 34th Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2019, July 18-20, 2019, New
           Brunswick, NJ, USA., pages 24:1–24:20, 2019. 26
[AKV04]    Albert Atserias, Phokion G. Kolaitis, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Constraint propagation as a proof
           system. In CP, pages 77–91, 2004. 8, 22
[And25]    Robert Andrews. Algebraic pseudorandomness in VNC0 . In Srikanth Srinivasan, editor, 40th
           Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2025, Toronto, Canada, August 5-8, 2025, LIPIcs,
           pages 15:1–15:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. 5
[BDG+ 99] Maria Luisa Bonet, Carlos Domingo, Ricard Gavaldà, Alexis Maciel, and Toniann Pitassi. Non-
          automatizability of bounded-depth Frege proofs. In Fourteenth Annual IEEE Conference on
          Computational Complexity (Atlanta, GA, 1999), pages 15–23. IEEE Computer Soc., Los Alamitos,
          CA, 1999. 9
[BHLS26] Amik Raj Behera, Magnus Rahbek Dalgaard Hansen, Nutan Limaye, and Srikanth Srinivasan.
         Separation results for constant-depth and multilinear ideal proof systems. CoRR, abs/2601.06299,
         2026. 8
[BIK+ 96] Paul Beame, Russell Impagliazzo, Jan Krajı́ček, Toniann Pitassi, and Pavel Pudlák. Lower bounds
          on Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz and propositional proofs. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 73(1):1–26,
          1996. 2, 3, 12
[BIK+ 21] Sam Buss, Dmitry Itsykson, Alexander Knop, Artur Riazanov, and Dmitry Sokolov. Lower bounds
          on OBDD proofs with several orders. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 22(4):26:1–26:30,
          2021. 8, 22
[BLRS25] Amik Raj Behera, Nutan Limaye, Varun Ramanathan, and Srikanth Srinivasan. New bounds for
         the ideal proof system in positive characteristic. In Keren Censor-Hillel, Fabrizio Grandoni, Joël
         Ouaknine, and Gabriele Puppis, editors, 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
         and Programming, ICALP 2025, Aarhus, Denmark, July 8-11, 2025, LIPIcs, pages 22:1–22:20.
         Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. 8
[BPR97]    Maria Luisa Bonet, Toniann Pitassi, and Ran Raz. Lower bounds for cutting planes proofs with
           small coefficients. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(3):708–728, 1997. 8
[BPR00]    Maria Luisa Bonet, Toniann Pitassi, and Ran Raz. On interpolation and automatization for Frege
           systems. SIAM J. Comput., 29(6):1939–1967, 2000. 9
[CEI96]    Matthew Clegg, Jeffery Edmonds, and Russell Impagliazzo. Using the Groebner basis algorithm
           to find proofs of unsatisfiability. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on the
           Theory of Computing (Philadelphia, PA, 1996), pages 174–183, New York, 1996. ACM. 3, 12



                                                    28
[CGMS25] Prerona Chatterjee, Utsab Ghosal, Partha Mukhopadhyay, and Amit Sinhababu. IPS lower
         bounds for formulas and sum of roabps. In C. Aiswarya, Ruta Mehta, and Subhajit Roy, editors,
         45th IARCS Annual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer
         Science, FSTTCS 2025, BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa Campus, India, December 17-19, 2025,
         LIPIcs, pages 22:1–22:21. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. 3, 8
[CP14]     Siu Man Chan and Aaron Potechin. Tight bounds for monotone switching networks via fourier
           analysis. Theory Comput., 10:389–419, 2014. 6
[dRGR22] Susanna F. de Rezende, Mika Göös, and Robert Robere. Guest column: Proofs, circuits, and
         communication. SIGACT News, 53(1):59–82, 2022. 7
[EGLT26] Tal Elbaz, Nashlen Govindasamy, Jiaqi Lu, and Iddo Tzameret. Lower bounds against the ideal
         proof system in finite fields. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on
         Theory of Computing (STOC), 2026. 3, 5, 8, 9, 22
[FGGR22] Noah Fleming, Mika Göös, Stefan Grosser, and Robert Robere. On semi-algebraic proofs and
         algorithms. In Mark Braverman, editor, 13th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
         Conference, ITCS 2022, Berkeley, CA, USA, January 31 - February 3, 2022, LIPIcs, pages
         69:1–69:25. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022. 13
[For14]    Michael A. Forbes. Polynomial Identity Testing of Read-Once Oblivious Algebraic Branching
           Programs. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2014. 11
[For24]    Michael A Forbes. Low-depth algebraic circuit lower bounds over any field. In 39th Computational
           Complexity Conference (CCC 2024), pages 31–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
           2024. 5
[FSTW21] Michael A. Forbes, Amir Shpilka, Iddo Tzameret, and Avi Wigderson. Proof complexity lower
         bounds from algebraic circuit complexity. Theory Comput., 17:1–88, 2021. 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 21,
         27
[GH03]     Dima Grigoriev and Edward A. Hirsch. Algebraic proof systems over formulas. Theoretical
           Computer Science, 303(1):83–102, 2003. 3, 27
[GHT22]    Nashlen Govindasamy, Tuomas Hakoniemi, and Iddo Tzameret. Simple hard instances for low-
           depth algebraic proofs. In 63rd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
           FOCS 2022, Denver, CO, USA, October 31 - November 3, 2022, pages 188–199. IEEE, 2022. 8, 9,
           22
[GP18]     Joshua A. Grochow and Toniann Pitassi. Circuit complexity, proof complexity, and polynomial
           identity testing: The ideal proof system. J. ACM, 65(6):37:1–37:59, 2018. 2, 3, 9, 12
[Gri98]    Dima Grigoriev. Tseitin’s tautologies and lower bounds for Nullstellensatz proofs. In IEEE
           Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 648–652, 1998. 26
[HLT24]    Tuomas Hakoniemi, Nutan Limaye, and Iddo Tzameret. Functional lower bounds in algebraic
           proofs: Symmetry, lifting, and barriers. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
           Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, page 1396–1404, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for
           Computing Machinery. Full version in ECCC https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2024/079/. 3, 5,
           8, 9, 22, 27
[IR22]     Dmitry Itsykson and Artur Riazanov. Automating OBDD proofs is NP-hard. Electronic Colloquium
           on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 29:TR22–046, 2022. 8
[IRS17]    Dmitry Itsykson, Artur Riazanov, and Dmitry Sokolov. On OBDD-based algorithms and proof
           systems that dynamically change the order of variables. In 34th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
           of Computer Science (STACS 2017), pages 43:1–43:14, 2017. 8
[KP89]     Jan Krajı́cek and Pavel Pudlák. Propositional proof systems, the consistency of first order theories
           and the complexity of computations. J. Symb. Log., 54(3):1063–1079, 1989. 8


                                                      29
[Kra97]    Jan Krajı́ček. Interpolation theorems, lower bounds for proof systems, and independence results
           for bounded arithmetic. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(2):457–486, 1997. 8, 20
[Kra08]    Jan Krajı́cek. An exponential lower bound for a constraint propagation proof system based on
           ordered binary decision diagrams. J. Symb. Log., 73(1):227–237, 2008. 8, 22
[KW93]     M. Karchmer and A. Wigderson. On span programs. In Proceedings of the Eigth Annual Structure
           in Complexity Theory Conference, pages 102–111, 1993. 5, 13
[LST26]    Jiaqi Lu, Rahul Santhanam, and Iddo Tzameret. AC0 [p]-frege cannot efficiently prove that constant-
           depth algebraic circuit lower bounds are hard. In 17th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
           Science Conference, ITCS 2026, Milan, Italy, 2026, 2026. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16824. 2
[LTW18]    Fu Li, Iddo Tzameret, and Zhengyu Wang. Characterizing propositional proofs as noncommutative
           formulas. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(4):1424–1462, 2018. 2
[Pit97]    Toniann Pitassi. Algebraic propositional proof systems. In Neil Immerman and Phokion G.
           Kolaitis, editors, Descriptive Complexity and Finite Models, Proceedings of a DIMACS Workshop
           1996, Princeton, New Jersey, USA, January 14-17, 1996, volume 31 of DIMACS Series in Discrete
           Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 215–244, Providence, RI, 1997. American
           Mathematical Society. 3
[Pit98]    Toniann Pitassi. Unsolvable systems of equations and proof complexity. In Proceedings of the
           International Congress of Mathematicians, Berlin, 1998, volume Extra Vol. ICM Berlin 1998, Vol.
           III, pages 451–460, 1998. 3
[PR18]     Toniann Pitassi and Robert Robere. Lifting nullstellensatz to monotone span programs over any
           field. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
           STOC 2018, page 1207–1219, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
           6, 7, 8, 10, 20, 21
[PS96]     Pavel Pudlák and Jiřı́ Sgall. Algebraic models of computation and interpolation for algebraic proof
           systems. In Paul Beame and Samuel Buss, editors, Proof Complexity and Feasible Arithmetic,
           volume 39 of DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, pages
           279–296. American Mathematical Society, 1996. 3, 8, 13
[PT16]     Toniann Pitassi and Iddo Tzameret. Algebraic proof complexity: progress, frontiers and challenges.
           ACM SIGLOG News, 3(3):21–43, aug 2016. 2
[Pud97]    Pavel Pudlák. Lower bounds for resolution and cutting plane proofs and monotone computations.
           The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(3):981–998, Sept. 1997. 8
[Raz95a]   Alexander A. Razborov. Bounded arithmetic and lower bounds in Boolean complexity. In Feasible
           mathematics, II (Ithaca, NY, 1992), volume 13 of Progr. Comput. Sci. Appl. Logic, pages 344–386.
           Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1995. 8
[Raz95b]   Alexander A. Razborov. Unprovability of lower bounds on circuit size in certain fragments of
           bounded arithmetic. Izv. Ross. Akad. Nauk Ser. Mat., 59(1):201–224, 1995. 8
[RM99]     Ran Raz and Pierre McKenzie. Separation of the monotone NC hierarchy. Comb., 19(3):403–435,
           1999. 5
[RPRC16] Robert Robere, Toniann Pitassi, Benjamin Rossman, and Stephen A. Cook. Exponential Lower
         Bounds for Monotone Span Programs. In Irit Dinur, editor, IEEE 57th Annual Symposium
         on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2016, 9-11 October 2016, Hyatt Regency, New
         Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, pages 406–415. IEEE Computer Society, 2016. 6, 7, 8, 10, 20, 21
[RS05]     Ran Raz and Amir Shpilka. Deterministic polynomial identity testing in non commutative models.
           Computational Complexity, 14(1):1–19, 2005. 4
[RT08a]    Ran Raz and Iddo Tzameret. Resolution over linear equations and multilinear proofs. Ann. Pure
           Appl. Logic, 155(3):194–224, 2008. 3, 27


                                                      30
[RT08b]   Ran Raz and Iddo Tzameret. The strength of multilinear proofs. Computational Complexity,
          17(3):407–457, 2008. 3
[Seg07]   Nathan Segerlind. Nearly-exponential size lower bounds for symbolic quantifier elimination
          algorithms and obdd-based proofs of unsatisfiability. CoRR, abs/cs/0701054, 2007. 8, 22
[Seg08]   Nathan Segerlind. On the relative efficiency of resolution-like proofs and ordered binary decision
          diagram proofs. In 23rd Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC 2008),
          pages 100–111, 2008. 8
[Sok26]   Dmitry Sokolov, 2026. Personal communication. 10
[ST25]    Rahul Santhanam and Iddo Tzameret. Iterated lower bound formulas: A diagonalization-
          based approach to proof complexity. SIAM Journal on Computing, Special Issue of STOC’21,
          0(0):STOC21–313–STOC21–349, 2025. 2
[Tse68]   Grigori Tseitin. On the complexity of derivations in propositional calculus. Studies in constructive
          mathematics and mathematical logic Part II. Consultants Bureau, New-York-London, 1968. 26
[Tza11]   Iddo Tzameret. Algebraic proofs over noncommutative formulas. Inf. Comput., 209(10):1269–1292,
          2011. 2




                                                    31
